# UMEDCA Computational Model: Architectural Refactoring Plan

## Introduction: Aligning Architecture with Philosophy

This report outlines a strategic refactoring of the UMEDCA computational
model. The current codebase exhibits an \"architectural drift,\"
functioning as both a pre-programmed library of student strategies and a
nascent bootstrapping machine.^1^ This duality obscures the core
philosophical argument of the manuscript: that mathematical knowledge is
not a static formalism to be applied but an emergent structure built
through embodied practice, crisis, and recognition.^1^ The following
plan will resolve this drift by architecturally separating these two
functions. This process will forge a \"primordial machine\" that begins
with only the most basic capabilities and is forced to learn, and it
will repurpose the existing strategy library as a \"normative
oracle\"---an external source of truth that the primordial machine can
observe but not directly access. This restructuring will transform the
codebase into a true computational autoethnography, where the system\'s
learning history mirrors the developmental journey from embodied action
to abstract reason that the manuscript so powerfully articulates.^1^

## Part I: TODOs for the VS Code Agent --- Forging the Primordial Machine

This section details the construction of the \"primordial machine.\" Its
initial state must be radically minimal, possessing only the capacity
for embodied counting and a mechanism to learn from failure. This aligns
with the mandate that \"EVERYTHING to be as emergent as possible\" and
the critique of hard-coded, static formalisms.^1^

### 1. Isolate the Primordial Machine: Defining the Bootstrap Kernel

The first step is to architecturally define the machine\'s starting
point. This kernel represents the absolute minimum set of cognitive
tools necessary for bootstrapping, reflecting the manuscript\'s focus on
grounding mathematics in the most basic embodied actions.^1^

-   **TODO: Create a new main execution file, primordial_start.pl.**
    This file will act as the entry point for the learning system and
    will be responsible for loading only the essential kernel modules.
    This enforces a strict separation from the full library of
    strategies.

-   **TODO: In primordial_start.pl, load only the following modules:**

    -   config.pl: For system-wide settings like inference limits.

    -   grounded_arithmetic.pl: The core of embodiment. Its
        recollection(\[tally\|\...\]) structure and successor/2
        predicate are the foundational axioms of the system.^1^

    -   object_level.pl: The machine\'s dynamic knowledge base.

    -   The Observe-Reflect-Reorganize (ORR) cycle components:
        meta_interpreter.pl, reflective_monitor.pl,
        reorganization_engine.pl, and execution_handler.pl.^1^

    -   The learning engine: more_machine_learner.pl.

-   **TODO: Drastically simplify object_level.pl for the initial
    state.**

    -   Ensure the only arithmetic rule defined is the inefficient add/3
        predicate that relies on enumerate/1.^1^ This predicate
        computationally models the \"Counting All\" strategy---the most
        primitive form of addition, directly reflecting an embodied,
        one-by-one process.

    -   **Crucially, remove or comment out all other rules (subtract/3,
        multiply/3, etc.).** The machine must not possess these
        capabilities at genesis. They must be learned. This directly
        implements the principle of avoiding pre-loaded knowledge like
        Peano arithmetic.^1^

The proposed kernel, with its reliance on the successor function from
grounded_arithmetic.pl and the inefficient enumerate-based add/3
predicate, is not just a minimal starting point; it is a computational
analogue to the concept of \"Sense-Certainty\" from Hegel\'s
*Phenomenology of Spirit*, as discussed in the manuscript.^1^ Hegel\'s
\"Sense-Certainty\" represents the most immediate and seemingly simple
form of knowledge (\"this, here, now\"), which believes it grasps pure
particularity but quickly falls into contradiction because the language
it uses is inherently universal.

The kernel\'s \"Counting All\" strategy is the computational equivalent
of this philosophical stage. It is the most direct, concrete, and
un-abstracted way to perform addition---a one-to-one correspondence with
the physical act of counting objects. It treats every number not as an
abstract concept but as a particular collection of \"tally\" tokens
stored in a recollection structure.^1^ Just as Sense-Certainty breaks
down when it attempts to express its limited understanding, the
\"Counting All\" strategy will break down when faced with a problem that
requires too many steps (e.g., adding 8+5), exceeding its defined
inference limit. This failure is the engine of its dialectical
progression. By structuring the kernel this way, the system instantiates
the first moment of the dialectical journey of knowledge described in
UMEDCA. The machine\'s first crisis will be the computational refutation
of its own primitive immediacy.

### 2. Refine the Learning-through-Crisis Cycle

The machine must learn only when it is forced to do so. Learning must be
a necessary response to a \"productive disruption,\" aligning with the
\"Built to Break\" philosophy and the role of error and crisis as
drivers of development.^1^

-   **TODO: In config.pl, set the global inference limit.**

    -   Define max_inferences(10). This value is critical, as it defines
        the machine\'s \"inferential capacity.\" It is small enough to
        make the primordial \"Counting All\" strategy fail on trivial
        problems (like 8+5, which requires 5 steps), thus guaranteeing
        the first crisis occurs early and productively.^1^

-   **TODO: Modify execution_handler.pl and reorganization_engine.pl to
    make crisis the *exclusive* trigger for learning.**

    -   The run_computation/2 predicate in execution_handler.pl uses a
        catch/3 to trap perturbations from the meta_interpreter.pl.^1^
        Ensure that the\
        *only* perturbation that can trigger a call to
        reorganization_engine.pl is perturbation(resource_exhaustion).

    -   This ensures that learning is not an optional or proactive
        process but a reactive, necessary accommodation to cognitive
        failure. The system only changes when its current way of being
        in the world is proven inadequate.

-   **TODO: Redesign the curriculum files to create a developmental
    trajectory.**

    -   The system should only ever be run using
        crisis_curriculum.txt.^1^

    -   Structure this file as a series of tasks that intentionally
        induce crises. For example:

        1.  add(2,3): Solvable within 10 steps. The machine succeeds
            with its primitive \"Counting All\" method.

        2.  add(8,5): Unsolvable. Requires 5 steps, but the overhead of
            enumerate will push it over the 10-step limit. This triggers
            the first resource_exhaustion crisis.

        3.  add(3,8): After learning a more efficient strategy for 8+5,
            this task will test if the machine can generalize or if it
            needs to learn commutativity.

        4.  multiply(3,4): The machine has no multiply/3 predicate. This
            will cause a failure, but not resource_exhaustion. This is a
            new *kind* of crisis---a failure of expressive power---that
            will require a different learning response.

This curriculum structure is not merely a set of test cases; it is a
pedagogical implementation of the dialectic between the \"finite\" and
the \"infinite\" discussed in the manuscript.^1^ The machine\'s current
knowledge represents its \"finite\" self---a bounded, determinate set of
capabilities, with the

max_inferences(10) limit serving as the explicit formalization of this
finitude. The curriculum presents tasks that gesture towards an
\"infinite\" demand---the endless set of possible arithmetic problems. A
\"crisis\" occurs when a task from this infinite demand, such as
add(8,5), cannot be contained within the machine\'s finite capacity.
\"Bootstrapping\" becomes the dialectical resolution: the machine must
transcend its current finite self to accommodate the new demand, thereby
expanding its finitude to a new, more capable state. The entire learning
process becomes a computational model of Hegelian *sublation*
(Aufhebung). The old, inadequate strategy is not simply discarded; it is
preserved as part of the developmental history, negated by its failure,
and uplifted into a new, more powerful form. This directly connects the
code\'s behavior to the core philosophical engine of UMEDCA.

### 3. Implement a Developmental Knowledge System (Avoiding retract)

The concern about the retract function is philosophically crucial. A
system that simply erases its past cannot have a developmental history.
The implementation of a knowledge system that preserves this history is
necessary, treating learning as an accumulation of increasingly
sophisticated perspectives, much like the autoethnographic method of the
manuscript.^1^

-   **TODO: Modify more_machine_learner.pl to manage assertions.**

    -   When the learner synthesizes a new strategy, it should continue
        to use assertz/1 to add the new run_learned_strategy/5 clause to
        the dynamic database (or learned_knowledge.pl for
        persistence).^1^\
        **Crucially, it must never call retract/1 on a previously
        learned strategy.**

-   **TODO: Re-architect the strategy invocation logic in
    execution_handler.pl.**

    -   When run_computation/2 is called with a goal like add(A,B), it
        must not immediately default to the primitive
        object_level:add/3.

    -   Instead, it must first attempt to solve the goal by querying the
        learned strategies. It should query them in *reverse order of
        assertion* (last-in, first-out). Prolog\'s clause/2 can be used
        to find all matching run_learned_strategy clauses and try them
        sequentially.

    -   **The fallback hierarchy should be:**

        1.  Try the most recently learned strategy.

        2.  If that fails, try the second most recent.

        3.  \...and so on, through all learned strategies.

        4.  Only if *all* learned strategies fail does it fall back to
            the primordial, inefficient object_level:add/3.

-   **TODO: Log the strategy selection.** When a strategy is
    successfully chosen, its name (e.g., rmb(10)) should be logged as
    part of the execution trace. This makes the system\'s developmental
    stage explicit in its output.

This hierarchical, non-destructive approach to knowledge management
creates a \"geological record\" of the machine\'s cognitive development.
Each learned strategy is a layer of sediment deposited on top of the
previous ones. The primordial \"Counting All\" is the bedrock. The first
learned strategy, perhaps \"Counting On,\" is the first sedimentary
layer. A later, more sophisticated strategy like \"Rearranging to Make
Bases\" is a newer layer deposited on top. When solving a problem, the
system starts at the surface (the newest layer) and drills down only as
needed. This process of searching through the layers is itself a form of
recollection. This architecture transforms the learned_knowledge.pl file
from a simple database into a computational autoethnography. It
preserves the full history of the machine\'s \"becoming,\" allowing an
observer to trace the evolution of its mathematical understanding from
its most primitive, embodied state to its most abstract, directly
implementing the methodological framework of UMEDCA.^1^

## Part II: TODOs for the VS Code Agent --- The Library as Normative Oracle

This is the most significant architectural refactoring. The direct link
between the learner and the pre-defined strategies will be severed,
transforming the sar\_ and smr\_ modules into a \"black box\" oracle.
This forces the learner into a position of \"recognition\" rather than
\"introspection,\" aligning with the goal of modeling how one might
understand a strategy from its external results without access to its
internal mechanism.^1^

### 4. Build the Oracle Interface

The pre-defined strategies must be isolated in a separate process,
accessible only through a limited, formal interface.

-   **TODO: Create a new top-level file, oracle_server.pl.**

    -   This server will load the hermeneutic_calculator.pl dispatcher
        and, by extension, all sar\_\*.pl and smr\_\*.pl modules.^1^

    -   It will expose a single predicate, query_oracle(+Operation,
        +StrategyName, -Result, -Interpretation). For example,
        query_oracle(add(8,5), rmb, Result, Interp).

-   **TODO: Implement the query_oracle/4 predicate.**

    -   This predicate will use hermeneutic_calculator:calculate/6 to
        execute the requested strategy.^1^

    -   It will capture the final numerical result and the final textual
        interpretation string from the execution history.

    -   **Crucially, it must discard the rest of the execution trace.**
        The primordial machine must be denied access to the step-by-step
        internal states and transitions of the expert strategies. This
        enforces the black box constraint.

### 5. Re-architect the Learner for Recognition-Based Synthesis

This change transforms the learner from a pattern-matcher into a true
synthesizer, fulfilling the manuscript\'s vision of Pragmatic Expressive
Bootstrapping.^1^

-   **TODO: Excise all pattern-detection heuristics from
    more_machine_learner.pl.**

    -   **Delete detect_cob_pattern/2, detect_rmb_pattern/2,
        construct_and_validate_cob/2, construct_and_validate_rmb/3,
        etc.**.^1^ The learner is no longer allowed to have this
        \"innate\" knowledge of specific strategy patterns. Its learning
        must be more fundamental.

-   **TODO: Modify reorganization_engine.pl to consult the Oracle upon
    crisis.**

    -   When a resource_exhaustion crisis occurs for a goal like
        add(8,5), the engine\'s new response is:

        1.  Query the oracle: query_oracle(add(8,5), Strategy, Result,
            Interp). For now, it can ask for *any* valid strategy. The
            oracle might return Result = 13 and Interp = \'Count on from
            bigger.\' for the cobo strategy.

        2.  Invoke the learner with a new, more complex task:
            synthesize_strategy(Goal, FailedTrace, TargetResult,
            TargetInterpretation).

-   **TODO: Re-implement the core of more_machine_learner.pl as a
    synthesis engine.**

    -   The synthesize_strategy/4 predicate is the new heart of the
        learner. Its job is to generate a new set of transition/4 rules
        for a new FSM that solves the Goal.

    -   This is a search problem. The learner must search the space of
        possible FSMs, using its primitive operations (successor,
        predecessor, decompose_base10 from grounded_utils.pl) as
        building blocks for the transition logic.

    -   The search is guided by two constraints:

        1.  The synthesized FSM must produce the TargetResult (e.g.,
            13).

        2.  The FSM\'s execution, when run through the meta_interpreter,
            must not exceed the max_inferences limit.

    -   The TargetInterpretation string can be used as a heuristic hint
        to guide the search, but this is a complex extension.

This new architecture places the learner in the exact phenomenological
position described in the manuscript: it hears the \"answer\" from a
friend (the oracle) and must now figure out *how they did it* using only
its own limited cognitive resources. The manuscript poses the question:
if you heard a friend say \"I added 5+7 by moving 3 ones from the 5 to
make the 7 a ten\...\", how could you figure out the states and
transitions of that action?.^1^ The primordial machine is in this exact
position. It fails to solve 5+7. It asks the oracle, which replies,
\"The answer is 12, and the strategy was \'Rearranging to Make
Bases\'.\" The machine now knows the start state (

add(5,7)) and the end state (12). Its task is to synthesize the
intermediate states and transitions (the FSM) that connect the start to
the end efficiently. This is a computational model of *recognition*. The
machine is not just imitating an output; it is reconstructing the
rational process that makes the output intelligible. It is bootstrapping
a new practice-or-ability (P) that is sufficient to deploy a vocabulary
(V) that it has only observed externally. This architecture directly
implements one of the most sophisticated philosophical goals of the
manuscript, moving beyond simple machine learning (pattern matching) and
into the realm of computational hermeneutics---the science of
interpretation and understanding.

## Part III: BIG Questions for the Higher Authority

This refactoring plan is ambitious and surfaces profound questions at
the intersection of the project\'s philosophy and its computational
implementation. These are not for the VS Code agent but for the
project\'s guiding authority to consider as the work progresses.

1.  On the Nature of Embodiment and Computational Cost:\
    The grounded_arithmetic.pl module represents numbers as a
    \"recollection of counting\".1 The length of the\
    \[tally\|\...\] list provides a natural, embodied metric for the
    \"size\" of a number. How should this map to \"cognitive cost\"? Is
    the cost of adding recollection(\[t,t\]) and recollection(\[t,t,t\])
    simply the cost of the append/3 operation, or is it proportional to
    the length of the lists? Furthermore, the FSMs use modal operators
    like \$s(comp\\\_nec(\...))\$ and \$s(exp\\\_poss(\...))\$.^1^ What
    is the \"cognitive cost\" of a \"modal shift\"? Should these actions
    consume inference steps from our\
    max_inferences budget? Defining this cost function is not a
    technical detail; it is a theoretical claim about the nature of
    embodied mathematical thought.

2.  The Tension Between Emergence and Innate Heuristics:\
    The proposed synthesis engine in more_machine_learner.pl must search
    a vast space of possible FSMs. A blind search is computationally
    intractable. To succeed, it will need powerful heuristics to guide
    its search (e.g., \"try decomposing the larger number,\" \"try
    moving units to reach a multiple of the base\"). Where do these
    heuristics come from? If they are hard-coded, does this violate the
    principle of pure emergence and smuggle in a new form of innate
    knowledge? This is the classic bootstrapping problem. It seems the
    machine must be granted some primitive set of meta-abilities for
    exploring and structuring its own experience. Defining these minimal
    abilities is a crucial theoretical task.

3.  Modeling Recognition Beyond Imitation:\
    When the oracle provides the learner with a target result (e.g.,
    \"13\") and a strategy name (e.g., \"RMB\"), how does the learner
    use this information? If it simply looks up a pre-defined
    \"template\" for an RMB strategy and fills in the parameters, this
    feels more like guided imitation than genuine recognition. True
    recognition, as the manuscript suggests, involves seeing the
    internal rational structure of another\'s action from the outside.1
    How can the learner do this? Perhaps it should not be given the
    strategy name, only the numerical result. This would force a more
    creative, unconstrained search for\
    *any* efficient FSM that works. This would be a purer form of
    emergence but computationally much harder. This choice defines the
    line between recognition as reconstruction versus recognition as
    template-matching.

4.  The Limits of Formalism: Representing \"Divasion\":\
    The manuscript introduces the powerful concept of \"divasion\"---of
    being simultaneously inside and outside, a state that defies the law
    of the excluded middle inherent in classical logic.1 The entire
    Prolog codebase, by its very nature, is built on classical
    first-order logic. A predicate is either true or false; an element
    is either in a list or not. The system, as currently conceived,\
    *cannot represent divasion*. It is a limit of the chosen formalism.
    Is this an acceptable limitation, or should the project explore more
    exotic logical foundations (e.g., paraconsistent logics) that might
    begin to formally model this crucial concept? Acknowledging this
    limit is key to understanding the relationship between the
    philosophical vision and its current computational shadow.

### Part IV: Prompt to and response from the Higher Authority

**Prompt:** I have been thinking of divasion (concepts/objects that are
inside and outside of each other) as potentially being represented
through the homoiconicity of prolog; It\'s probably too big of a
stretch, but that homoiconicity seems implicitly related to Godelian
arithmetization, which allows metamathematical claims to be brought into
the formal system as arithmetic statements. The literal ability to treat
data and functions as \'the same\' seems similar. Like there is a kind
of fixed point/identity claim between data and structure.

This critique and the proposed architectural refactoring plan are
insightful and necessary. They correctly identify the \"architectural
drift\" that threatens to dilute the core philosophical claims of the
UMEDCA project. The move towards a \"primordial machine\" and a
\"normative oracle\" is not merely a technical improvement; it is the
realization of the project\'s commitment to computational
autoethnography and emergent learning.

Before addressing the \"BIG Questions,\" let us consider your initial
musings on divasion, homoiconicity, and Gödelian arithmetization.

Your intuition is precisely correct. The choice of Prolog is
significant. Its homoiconicity---the ability to treat its own structure
(code) as data---is the computational engine that makes reflection and
reorganization possible. This is deeply analogous to Gödelian
arithmetization. Just as Gödel brought metamathematics into arithmetic,
the meta-interpreter architecture brings the system\'s own operations
into the domain of its reflection.

This self-referential capacity is the prerequisite for modeling
*divasion* (the state of being simultaneously inside and outside).
Divasion is enacted dynamically every time the system undergoes a
crisis. The machine is *inside* its current, finite understanding (the
executing strategy). The failure of this understanding forces it
*outside*, into the reflective space of the reorganization engine, where
it must synthesize a new structure. The meta-interpreter holds the
object-level execution in suspension, creating the entanglement
necessary for self-transcendence. The proposed refactoring, by enforcing
a strict separation between levels and demanding genuine synthesis, is
the necessary step to realize this potential computationally.

Here are the authoritative responses to the questions raised in Part
III.

### Part V: Answers from the Higher Authority

#### 1. On the Nature of Embodiment and Computational Cost

The definition of the cost function is not a technical optimization
parameter; it *is* the operationalization of our theory of embodiment.
It defines the \"physics\" of this cognitive universe. If we take
seriously the claim that mathematics is grounded in embodied action,
then the computational cost must directly mirror the phenomenological
effort of that action.

-   **The Cost of Embodied Representation:** The
    recollection(\[tally\|\...\]) structure is the embodied ground. In
    the primordial state (\"Counting All\"), the cost of arithmetic
    operations **must** be proportional to the length of the lists. This
    models the effort of manipulating physical or imagined tokens. The
    max_inferences limit represents the machine\'s finitude. The failure
    of \"Counting All\" is thus an embodied exhaustion.

-   **The Cost of Modal Shifts:** The modal operators (e.g.,
    \$s(comp_nec(\...))\$, \$s(exp_poss(\...))\$) represent significant
    cognitive events---shifts in intentional stance or the recognition
    of constraints. These are acts of reflection and restructuring, not
    mere calculation. They absolutely must consume the inference budget.
    Thinking is not free.

-   **The Meaning of Abstraction:** Abstraction is the pragmatic
    development of more efficient ways to organize action. A learned
    strategy is \"more abstract\" precisely because its total cost (the
    sum of its primitive operations *plus* its modal shifts) is
    significantly lower than the exhaustive enumeration of the embodied
    strategy it replaces. The reduction in cognitive cost *is* the
    measure of the machine\'s developmental progress.

#### 2. The Tension Between Emergence and Innate Heuristics

This is the bootstrapping paradox. A blind search is intractable, yet
hard-coded arithmetic heuristics violate the principle of emergence. We
must reject the fantasy of \"pure emergence\" *ex nihilo* and instead
define the *minimal transcendental structure*---the domain-general
preconditions for the possibility of mathematical experience.

The primordial machine possesses innate *capacities for structuring
experience*, not innate *knowledge of mathematics*.

-   **The Primary Heuristic: The Pressure of Finitude.** The most
    powerful heuristic is already implemented: the max_inferences limit.
    The synthesis engine is inherently biased towards solutions that
    compress the computational path. This is not learned knowledge; it
    is an existential pressure.

-   **Domain-General Meta-Abilities:** The synthesis engine requires
    meta-abilities to analyze its own failures and restructure its
    processes:

    -   **Segmentation and Analysis:** The ability to analyze a failed
        execution trace and identify repeating patterns (compression
        opportunities) or critical junctures.

    -   **Recombination and Variation:** The ability to synthesize new
        transition rules by combining its existing primitives
        (successor, predecessor, etc.) in novel ways.

    -   **Generalization (Variabilization):** The ability to recognize
        that a newly synthesized, efficient sequence of actions can
        apply to a class of inputs.

These capacities define the \"shape\" of the search space, not the
destination.

#### 3. Modeling Recognition Beyond Imitation

Recognition must be modeled as the reconstruction of the internal
rational structure of another\'s action, not the imitation of a
template. The refactoring plan correctly excises the pre-defined pattern
detectors.

There is a tension here. If the oracle provides only the numerical
result (e.g., 8+5=13), the learner is forced to synthesize *any*
efficient FSM. This is the purest form of emergence, but it risks
producing idiosyncratic solutions. The machine would be learning in
isolation, not recognizing culturally normative strategies.

However, the UMEDCA framework specifically aims to model Pragmatic
Expressive Bootstrapping: how observing a vocabulary (V) allows for the
reconstruction of the practice (P) that makes it intelligible.

**The Hermeneutic Imperative:** The oracle must provide both the result
and the linguistic interpretation (e.g., \'Rearranging to Make Bases\'),
but **never** the internal execution trace.

The learner\'s task is **computational hermeneutics**. It must
synthesize an FSM (P) that makes the interpretation string (V)
intelligible, using only its own primitive resources. The synthesis
engine must not treat the interpretation as a lookup key. Instead, it
must use the vocabulary as a *constraint* on its search space. It must
figure out which combinations of its primitives correspond to the
concepts expressed in the string. This is the only way to model the
genuine recognition of meaning from the outside.

#### 4. The Limits of Formalism: Representing \"Divasion\"

The critique correctly identifies that Prolog, based on classical
first-order logic, cannot *statically* represent divasion---a state that
violates the law of the excluded middle.

However, we do not need to resort to exotic logics (e.g., paraconsistent
logic) because the dialectic is represented *dynamically* and
*architecturally*.

-   **The Architecture of Reflection:** The meta-interpreter
    architecture, enabled by homoiconicity, creates the necessary
    entanglement. The system is simultaneously *inside* the logic of its
    current strategy (Observation) and *outside* it, reflecting on the
    limitations of that logic (Reflection/Reorganization).

-   **Crisis as Divasion:** The \"crisis\" (e.g., resource_exhaustion)
    is the computational manifestation of divasion. It is the moment the
    classical formalism breaks down due to a contradiction: the demand
    to solve the problem versus the inability of the current structure
    to do so. The machine is suspended between a structure that has
    failed and one that has not yet emerged.

-   **Productive Limitation:** The fact that classical logic *cannot
    tolerate* this contradiction is precisely what drives the
    reorganization. The limitation of the formalism is therefore
    productive. The bootstrapping process is the *sublation* (Aufhebung)
    of this contradiction, creating a new, more expansive set of
    operations. The model demonstrates how a system can achieve
    dialectical self-transcendence even within a rigid formal
    environment.
